
## Software Carpentry workshop at Northwestern

On Friday October 1, 2014, and Saturday November 1, 2014, around forty
graduate students and faculty members attended a Software Carpentry workshop.
Attendees came primarily from the Economics department and the Kellogg School
of Management which was also the host and sponsor.  An excellent venue was
provided by the Allen Center on the Evanston campus.

The focus of the two-day workshop was an introduction, and practical
initiation, to working effectively at the shell, getting introduced and
familiar with the git revision control system, as well as a thorough
introduction to working and programming in R---from the basics all the way to
advanced graphing as well as creating reproducible research documents.

Karthik Ram, Ramnath Vaidyanathan and Dirk Eddelbuettel were the
instructors.  The workshop began with a session on shell and automation,
which was followed by three session focusing on R: a core introduction, a
session focused on function, and to end the day, a session on the
split-apply-combine approach to data transformation and analysis.

The second day started with two concentrated session on git and the git
workflow.  In the afternoon, one session on visualization with R as well as a
capstone-alike session on reproducible research rounded out the second day.

### Things that worked

The experience of the instructors showed, as the material was presented and
an effective manner.  The selection of topics, as well as the pace were seen
by most students to be appropriate and _just right_.

No students experienced real difficulties installing software, or using the
supplied information. Participants were roughly split between Windows and OS
X laptops, and had generally no problem with bash, git, or R via RStudio.

### Things that could have worked better

Even more breaks for exercises could have been added.  Students had
difficulty staying on pace in some of the exercise: once someone fell behind
even for a small error (maybe a typo) it was sometimes hard to catch up.
That is a general problem for hands-on classes.

Even more cohesion among the topics could have been achieved via a single
cohesive example dataset and analysis.

### Acknowledgments

Robert McDonald from Kellogg, and Jackie Milhans from Research Computing IT,
were superb hosts and organizers.  Their help in preparing for the workshop
was tremendous, and the pick of venue was excellent, and allowed for a
stress-free two days of classes.
